2023.3.0 (#26410)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_posts/2023-03-01-release-20233.markdown

---
layout: post
title: "2023.3: Dialogs!"
description: "A brand new restart dialog, ask Assist about the state of your home, amazing new dialogs for lights and switches, Thread & Matter updates, control the precision of your sensors, and Python 3.11 support."
date: 2023-03-01 00:00:00
date_formatted: "March 1, 2023"
author: Franck Nijhof
author_twitter: frenck
comments: true
categories:
  - Release-Notes
  - Core
og_image: /images/blog/2023-03/social.png
---

<a href='/integrations/#version/2023.3'><img src='/images/blog/2023-03/social.png' style='border: 0;box-shadow: none;'></a>

Home Assistant Core 2023.3! 🎉

February was a short month, resulting in a short release cycle, but... That
didn't stop anybody from stuffing this release with many great improvements!

As the release title most fittingly puts it, most features of this release
show up in dialogs. New dialogs, restyled dialogs, new features that appear

> in dialogs, and all sorts of new dialogues can you have with Assist. Something

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in dialogs, and all sorts of new dialogues you can have with Assist. Something
```

with "dialogs" all over these release notes!

Besides dialogs, this release brings in three new integrations, updates to
Thread and Matter, and quite an impressive list of other noteworthy changes.

My personal favorite in this release is, undoubtedly, the all-new restart dialog.
It brings in proper choice, less navigation, and it looks slick! I am genuinely
really loving and enjoying the result. 🤩

Enjoy the release!

../Frenck

<!--more-->

- [Restarting Home Assistant](#restarting-home-assistant)
- [Asking Assist for the current state of things](#asking-assist-for-the-current-state-of-things)
- [Cleaner entity information dialogs](#cleaner-entity-information-dialogs)
- [New dialogs for lights, switches and siren entities](#new-dialogs-for-lights-switches-and-siren-entities)

> - [Sensor precision](#sensor-precision)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Sensor display precision](#sensor-display-precision)
```

<img class="no-shadow" src='/images/blog/2023-03/restart-home-assistant.png' alt='Screenshot showing the new restart dialog of Home Assistant that provides a guidance on what action to take.'>

Nice, right? 🤩 What is entirely new is the first item shown: "Quick reload".
Quick reload calls all active integrations in your system that support
reloading YAML configuration on the fly 🚀.

This means all integrations individually listed as reloadable under the YAML
tab in the developer tools are reloaded simultaneously! Also, [@frenck] made
quick reload available as a {% my developer_call_service service="homeassistant.reload_all" title="service" %},
so you can automate with it.

Lastly, another place for finding it more easily; the option to restart has
also been added to the three-dotted overflow menu in the top right of the
settings screen.

[@frenck]: https://github.com/frenck
[@matthiasdebaat]: https://github.com/matthiasdebaat
[@piitaya]: https://github.com/piitaya

## Asking Assist for the current state of things

This release updates Assist with the capability to ask for the state of things
around your home. For example:

> <img class="no-shadow" src='/images/blog/2023-03/ask-assist-for-states.png' alt='Screenshot showing the assist conversation dialog demonstrating new new intents to get the state of things in your home.'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img class="no-shadow" src='/images/blog/2023-03/ask-assist-for-states.png' alt='Screenshot showing the assist conversation dialog demonstrating new intents to get the state of things in your home.'>
```

Intents for three types of questions have been added:

- Ask for the state of a single entity:
  - _"What is the outside temperature?"_
  - _"Is the front door locked?"_
  - _"What is the power consumption in the office?"_
- Any or all questions:
  - _"Are any lights on in the bedroom?"_
  - _"Are all windows closed in the kitchen?"_
- How many or which questions:

>   - _"How many lights on are in the office?"_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - _"How many lights are on in the office?"_
```

  - _"Which doors are open?"_

Thanks, [@synesthesiam] for implementing this, and thanks to language leaders
and contributors for helping out providing translations for all these [intents]! ❤️

Want to help with adding support for these intents in your language? Please do!
Read more about [contributing sentences in our documentation](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/voice/intent-recognition/contributing).

[@synesthesiam]: https://github.com/synesthesiam
[intents]: https://github.com/home-assistant/intents

## Cleaner entity information dialogs

> The entity information dialog (also known as the more-info dialogs) got some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The entity information dialog (also known as the more-info dialog) got some
```

There is more to tell about this release's more-info dialogs. [@matthiasdebaat]
and [@piitaya] have been working on the designs shared 
[during the State of the Open Home 2022](https://www.youtube.com/live/D936T1Ze8-4?feature=share&t=5193).
This release brings in the first overhauls to the entity dialogs of light,
switch, and siren entities.

<img class="no-shadow" style="padding-right: 24px" src='/images/blog/2023-03/new-light-switch-more-info-dialog.png' alt='Screenshots showing the new entity more-info dialogs for a light, a switch and a switch with an assumed state.'>

The new dialogs are nice and clean. The new sliders and buttons work absolutely
magnificent on both desk and mobile. For the brightness slider, you can drag
it all down without turning the light off, making it possible to dim your
light to even the lowest point.

In case of a light, additional controls for turning on/off, color (temperature),
and effects appear right below the slider. In the top right, you'll find the new
controls that come with the cleaner look we discussed in the previous paragraph.

[@matthiasdebaat]: https://github.com/matthiasdebaat
[@piitaya]: https://github.com/piitaya

> ## Sensor precision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Sensor display precision
```

Got a sensor that has too many decimals in its numeric value? Would you like

> to round it to a single or maybe even no decimals?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to display it rounded to a single or maybe even no decimals?
```

Just ~~create a template sensor~~ change it directly from the UI!

<img class="no-shadow" src='/images/blog/2023-03/entity-precision.png' alt='Screenshot showing you can now set the numerical

> precision of an sensor entity value from the entity settings dialog.'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
precision of a sensor entity value shown in the UI from the entity settings dialog.'>
```

Thanks [@emontnemery] for building out this feature!

This has also been extended into integrations, which now can provide
a more precise value while suggesting to, show it with less precision
by default. This allows you to change it if you don't like the defaults.

You can also take advantage of the configured precision when writing templates,
as the `states()` function has been extended to help with that.
You can find more information on
[formatting sensor states in the templating documentation](/docs/configuration/templating/#formatting-sensor-states).

[@emontnemery]: https://github.com/emontnemery

## New create automation dialog

Let's continue the dialogs theme this release! As [@piitaya] also gave
the dialog you see when you create a new automation, a facelift!

You can now quickly find and pick a Blueprint to use for your automation or
create one from scratch. The overall look and feel is much more modern, and
fits our current design better.

> <img class="no-shadow" src='/images/blog/2023-03/new-automation-dialog.png' alt='Screenshot showing the improved createnew automation dialogs, which allows easily start an new automation from a blueprint or from scratch.'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img class="no-shadow" src='/images/blog/2023-03/new-automation-dialog.png' alt='Screenshot showing the improved createnew automation dialogs, which allows easily starting a new automation from a blueprint or from scratch.'>
```

Some of the features mentioned in that blog post will become available today.

The most visual change is that the [Thread integration](/integration/thread)
will now show up on your devices & services dashboard. The "Configure" button
on the Thread card will reveal the all-new Thread panel.

<img class="no-shadow" src='/images/blog/2023-03/thread-panel.png' alt='Screenshot of the all new Thread panel, giving insight into your Thread network(s).'>

The Thread panel lets you view your Thread network(s) and provides controls
to add an OpenThread border router. More importantly, an option to download
diagnostics has been added in the three-dotted menu in the top right. This will
help with finding, triaging, and fixing issues as the development
on Thread continues.

As for Matter, it now supports connecting to Matter bridges! So, you can
now connect, for example, your Hue hub over Matter!

<p class='img'>
<img src='/images/blog/2023-03/matter-bridges.png' alt='Screenshot showing the Home Assistant Matter integration card, with lots of devices and entities; brought in by Hue bridges.'></a>
Two Philips Hue bridges connected using Matter, and it is fast!
</p>

> Althought, if you want to connect your Hue hub, we of course recommend using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although, if you want to connect your Hue hub, we of course recommend using
```

the dedicated [Hue integration](/integrations/hue), which will provide a much
more stable and feature rich solution. Nevertheless, having bridge support is
a huge milestone!

Adding a Matter device is now also more logical. Just add a new device
from the Devices & Services page, just like how you would add any other device
or integration to Home Assistant. Oh! Let's not forget about [@ArturoGuerra],
who added support for color lights to Matter! Thanks!

[@ArturoGuerra]: https://github.com/ArturoGuerra

## Python 3.11 support

Support for Python 3.11 is here! 🐍

This change is only interesting if you manually run Home Assistant
directly in Python (the Home Assistant Core installation method). If that

> is the case, you can now start using Home Assistant using Python 3.11, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is the case, you can now start using Home Assistant with Python 3.11, which
```

Found a bug or issue? Please report it in our [issue tracker](https://github.com/home-assistant/core/issues),
to get it fixed! Or, check [our help page](/help) for guidance for more
places you can go.

Are you more into email? [Sign-up for our Building the Open Home Newsletter](/newsletter)
to get the latest news about features, things happening in our community and
other news about building an Open Home; straight into your inbox.

## Breaking Changes

{% details "Assist / Conversation" %}

Previously, all entities and areas were exposed to Assist's default agent. This
is now restricted to entities of the following domains:

- `climate`
- `cover`
- `fan`
- `humidifier`
- `light`
- `lock`
- `scene`
- `script`
- `sensor`
- `switch`
- `vacuum`
- `water_heater`

Only areas with exposed entities will be exposed themselves. In the future,
this will be customizable through the frontend.

([@synesthesiam] - [#88274]) ([documentation](/integrations/conversation))

[@synesthesiam]: https://github.com/synesthesiam
[#88274]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/88274

{% enddetails %}

{% details "Atmospheric pressure device triggers" %}

> A bug with the atmospheric pressure sensor device triggers has been corrected,
> automations using such device triggers will need to be adjusted/reconfigured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A bug with the atmospheric pressure sensor device triggers has been corrected.
Automations using such device triggers will need to be adjusted/reconfigured.
```

- "Backup mode" -> `backup`
- "Eco mode" -> `eco`
- "Peak shaving" -> `peak_shaving`
- "Eco charge mode" -> `eco_charge`
- "Eco discharge mode" -> `eco_discharge`

If you used these select values in your automations or scripts, you will need
to adjust those to match this change.

([@mletenay] - [#86901]) ([documentation](/integrations/goodwe))

[@mletenay]: https://github.com/mletenay
[#86901]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/86901

{% enddetails %}

{% details "HomeKit" %}

VOC mappings in the HomeKit integration have been improved to use the IAQ
guidelines for Europe released by the WHO (World Health Organization).

HomeKit | Previous VOC µg/m3 | New VOC µg/m3
-- | -- | --
Excellent | <= 24 | <= 250
Good | <= 48 | <= 500
Fair | <= 64 | <= 1000
Inferior | <= 96 | <= 3000
Poor | > 96 | > 3000

Reference: [Sensirion_Gas_Sensors_SGP3x_TVOC_Concept.pdf](https://github.com/paulvha/svm30/blob/master/extras/Sensirion_Gas_Sensors_SGP3x_TVOC_Concept.pdf) 

([@emanuelst] - [#87663]) ([documentation](/integrations/homekit))

[@emanuelst]: https://github.com/emanuelst
[#87663]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/87663

{% enddetails %}

{% details "Matter" %}

> With this release, you will need to update your zwave-js-server instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this release, you will need to update your Matter Server instance.
```

- A `suggested_display_precision` is set.

([@jbouwh] - [#87004]) ([documentation](/integrations/mqtt))

[@jbouwh]: https://github.com/jbouwh
[#87004]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/87004

{% enddetails %}

{% details "Plugwise" %}

The unit of measurement for the P1 gas consumed interval sensor is changed
from `m³` to `m³/h`. Go to Developer Option --> Statistics for the options
on how to handle this change in your existing installation.

([@bouwew] - [#87449]) ([documentation](/integrations/plugwise))

[@bouwew]: https://github.com/bouwew
[#87449]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/87449

{% enddetails %}

{% details "Profiler" %}

The `profiler.memory` service is unavailable when using Python 3.11, due to
an incompatibility with a needed dependency for this service. It will return
when the used `guppy3` package becomes available with Python 3.11 compatibility.

([@bdraco] - [#88136]) ([documentation](/integrations/profiler))

[@bdraco]: https://github.com/bdraco
[#88136]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/88136

{% enddetails %}

{% details "Template: Covers" %}

Template covers using `optimistic: false` without `value_template` nor

> `position_template` having a managed state. If you want to keep the

Reviewer: I don't understand "having a managed state".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`position_template` still updated state optimistically. The integration now respects the optimistic setting of false. If you want to keep the
```

previous behavior, you must set the `optimistic` value to `true`,
or remove the optimistic declaration.

([@ylemoigne] - [#87925]) ([documentation](/integrations/template))

[@ylemoigne]: https://github.com/ylemoigne
[#87925]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/87925

{% enddetails %}

{% details "Trafikverket Weather" %}

> The unit of measurement and device class has been incorrectly set to `mm` while the
> API is returning `mm/h`. This has now been corrected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unit of measurement was incorrectly set to `mm` while the
API is returning `mm/h`. The unit of measurement and device class have now been corrected.
```

([@gjohansson-ST] - [#87308]) ([documentation](/integrations/trafikverket_weatherstation))

[@gjohansson-ST]: https://github.com/gjohansson-ST
[#87308]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/87308

{% enddetails %}

{% details "Todoist" %}

Labels used by custom projects for filtering are now case-sensitive.

> Previously there were automatically lower-cased by the integration,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously the labels were automatically lower-cased by the integration,
```

but in Todoist a label like `Test` and `test` are considered unique.

> Because of that labels will now by case sensitive in your configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of that labels will now be case sensitive in your configuration.
```

and scripts.

([@bdraco] - [#88387]) ([documentation](/integrations/unifiprotect))

[@bdraco]: https://github.com/bdraco
[#88387]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/88387

---

The previously deprecated "Detected Object" sensor has been removed.

The sensor was removed because if multiple objects are detected at once
(very common for package detection), Home Assistant could not be automated
using the second detected object. The sensor has been split out from the single
Detected Object sensor into multiple binary issues for each detection type.

([@bdraco] - [#85656]) ([documentation](/integrations/unifiprotect))

[@bdraco]: https://github.com/bdraco
[#85656]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/85656

{% enddetails %}

{% details "Wiffi" %}

The Wiffi unit of illuminance `lux` has been adjusted to the standard unit 
Home Assistant uses `lx`.

([@mampfes] - [#87377]) ([documentation](/integrations/wiffi))

[@mampfes]: https://github.com/mampfes
[#87377]: https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/87377

{% enddetails %}

{% details "Z-Wave" %}

With this release, you will need to update your zwave-js-server instance.

> You must use `zwave-js-server` 1.26.0 or greater (schema 24).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must use `zwave-js-server` 1.26.0 or greater (schema 26).
```
